Hello and welcome everyone. I haven't done a live stream in a little while, so I thought it would be a good opportunity to talk about a few um recent discussions and topics that I have um have been covering on the channel and well, elsewhere. So, um I titled this video miracles, and uh that's because that's been a kind of a theme that I've been talking about. Let me me actually just share um share my screen here so I can show you what I'm talking about.

Nope, that's that's not what I want. Yeah, this one. Um Uh yes, here we go. So, um most recently I talked about the Marian apparitions and subsequent miracle of the sun at Fatima, and I had a discussion with um uh Ethan Muse a few weeks ago uh following up on that. Uh but before that, we had a debate on the uh Shroud of Turin. Um And uh that's following up several discussions I've had on that over the past uh past year or 18 months. We did a Bad Apologetics on that uh think 18 months or so ago. And then a few months ago, I um also had this debate with um Tavo about the resurrection, or specifically the RHBS model, and that's obviously been following up many discussions uh like this video and and other debates that I've had uh talking about the

resurrection. Welcome. Good morning. Well, it's evening where I am, so uh welcome to viewers from all parts of the globe. So, anyway, what I wanted to discuss is kind of a um integrated review of these three uh topics and also some related issues about miracles. Um I don't plan on doing a detailed like rundown of of those debates and and discussions. Um I do want to cover some of the aspects, particularly about the miracle of the sun, that we didn't have time in my discussion with Ethan to go into as much detail, but he's um My understanding is he's still preparing some of his content there. So, I'll I'll get to that at some point in the future.

If people have specific questions, you're welcome to put them in the chat or as a comment later on if you're watching. And I can address some of those. But anyway, what I wanted to talk about is more of the sort of meta topic about miracles and how to think about the claims of divine intervention um in the world. These are This is This is an issue I have talked about before. I thought now would be a good time, given recent topics as I said, to kind of review that and um apply some of those uh points and and some of the ways that I think about this to some of the recent uh uh specific discussions that that have happened. So, um let's first of all talk about what I mean by a miracle. Um interestingly, I don't think that ever came up in any of

these um any of these three discussions or debates. Um in one sense, it's quite difficult to define what is meant by miracle when we're talking about uh the action of the divine or like of God, because God is supposed to be talking about the sort of traditional classical theism or um related conceptions of God, where he is supposed to be all powerful and the creator of the universe and the sort of ground of all being, the sustainer of everything. Um in that sense, there isn't really anything that's outside of his scope. And so, it's kind of hard to pick out then some parts of the world and call those natural or or normal, and then separate those from other parts which are the miraculous bits. I mean, on what basis do we do that? Um

I don't like this box like covering my face bit. I'll bring that back if we need it. But anyway, um So, that I think is a is a conceptual issue and there are, you know, fears to have commented on this as well. Uh I think a standard way of reconciling that is to say that God created the world to operate so that it operates in accordance with certain regularities or laws.

And um whether you think of those as in some way like directly sustained by God or just initially created and then they operate by themselves uh is is not the most important thing, but the um what's critical is just that the idea is that there are certain regularities that the world, the universe follows most of the time. Uh and this is what theists normally say is what is investigated in scientific study is these regular processes.

And the these regular processes, laws of nature if you want to call them that, are what determines what happens the majority of the time in most most events, at least in most contexts. Um Good good question. Well, we'll come to that. Um that's sort of what I'm what I'm building up to here. So, um yeah, if people have more questions about anything that's happened lately, particularly in the direction of miracles, put them in the chat and and now's a good time to discuss those. Or if you're watching later again, um put them in the comments to the video.

Um What was I saying? Yes, okay. So, that So, there's God creates the universe. He sets it up to operate in some sort of accordance with certain regularities which which he creates, but then mostly leaves alone. But sometimes he doesn't leave them alone and he intervenes. He acts in creation, exerts his will, um, exerts a causal force on the world so as to change the way that something happens, uh, so that it's different to what would happen typically if he left it to operate under the laws that he initially, uh, established.

So, that that is what I understand. That's how I think about what a miracle is. It's an instance where God intervenes in the world to change an outcome or a set of outcomes uh, from what it would otherwise have been if the ordinary laws of nature or regularities of the world operated, um, so as to make it different. I don't know that this is a perfect definition because then it certain things that don't directly involve divine action would would not actually count as miracles. So, you know, i- if you think that there are demons, for example, that God allows to operate but are not directly controlled by God, then if a demon would have possessed someone, then that would not be a miracle. I mean, I think that would be consistent

with how other people would define a miracle. Miracle is something from God, right? But it would be a supernatural occurrence, um, so so we shouldn't conflate those two things, um, a- and maybe there are even regular parts of nature that God set up that are still outside of the natural world, uh, if you believe in, um, paranormal, um, faculties like clairvoyance or something. I mean, I think think some theists believe in, uh, some things like that. So, I'm not sure exactly how to draw those boundaries.

That's not the main point I'm I'm trying to make here. I'm just trying to, uh, circumscribe somewhat of a clear conception of what is meant by a miracle cuz obviously it in discussions about whether a certain miracle occurred, you obviously need to have relatively clear or reasonably clear notion of what the claim is supposed to be. Uh, cuz again, if God directly controls everything, then everything is a miracle and it's sort of a pointless discussion.

Um, but I think that the crux of the matter is normally when there's a miracle claim, there's a claim that something different to normal has happened. Something that was inexplicable without postulating some fairly direct divine intervention. Not the sort of divine action where uh that that is encompassed by creation, cuz obviously God is supposed to created everything, uh but something more direct and immediate that modifies the typical course of affairs. Okay, so that's the notion of miracles that I'm that I'm going to go with.

Um Yeah, from eternity he has to tinker with his own system, right? And there are deists in 18th century who argue that this is ridiculous that God would have set things up right the first time and without the need to tinker. Of course, you you can always respond to that that God just likes to do it that way, which is one of the problems with appealing to miracles. That that's sort of getting at the the core issue, I think, with miracles as an explanation.

Uh which is that there is sort of no constraints on what you can say, or almost none. But anyway, so so that's the conception of miracle that I'm going to operate under, and that's sort of tacitly what I'm assuming when I have these debates. Okay, so when there is then some sort of event uh or set of uh facts or whether it's an artifact like the shroud or whether it's eyewitness testimony like the miracle of Fatima or whether we're dealing with like a text and records relating to eyewitness testimony uh in the case of the resurrection, um these data which come to us and are presented to us are regarded by some people as anomalous in certain ways.

And as uh skeptics or naturalists, we may agree that they're anomalous or we may not. Identifying something as anomalous is in in the sense I'm using it here just to say that it's unusual, it raises questions, it's not immediately explicable, uh requires further investigation, something like that. So, lots of things are anomalous. Uh scientists study uh anomalies all the time. That's sort of what we do. Uh so, to say something is anomalous doesn't mean that it's a miracle or paranormal or supernatural. just means I think that it's sort of uh raises questions and is worthy of further investigation. It does not have a sort of immediate prima facie explanation. Of course, what some people regard as anomalous will not be regarded

as anomalous by other people depending on your background knowledge. So, that's sort of one wrinkle here, but you know, I I'm happy to say that in the three cases that I'm looking at here, resurrection, shroud, and the miracle of the sun, that these are all anomalous in some sense, right? That you know, people don't normally claim to have been visited by someone who they knew and then who died and then came back. It's fairly rare that we get those sort of reports and even in ancient texts.

So, it's unusual, it's a bit strange, it's a bit anomalous. You know, there's something to explain there. Likewise, the shroud, there's plenty of religious artifacts. The shroud is pretty unusual in the way that it seems to have been created or like it's it's properties. You know, we talked about some of those in the debate. Um So, it's only interesting, worthy of investigation, questions about how and when it originated, things like that.

Miracle of Fatima, pretty clear that there's lots of people claiming to have seen something in the sky, which is, you know, not typical that the sun was you could that they could look at it and that it didn't hurt their eyes and that it sort of moved or rotated or spun or fell or of something depending on who you ask, but the point is that there's there's something unusual that doesn't typically happen, you know, with the sun or that people don't normally report.

So, so we have these these data, reports, or documents, or artifacts which are in some way anomalous. You might argue you might differ as exactly how anomalous they are, but I think that it's fair to say that they're at least somewhat outside the norm and something that we can investigate and and there's reasonable to ask questions about. So, they're um that's when I think that typically, I mean, again, you can theoretically appeal to anything as being a miracle, but often, and Christians sometimes do this, like the miracle of nature and and things like this, or the miracle of life, but in the specific context that I'm talking about here, we have this notion of a miracle as divine intervention to change the course of

affairs as to what they would otherwise be, and we have the a prima facie miracle as an anomaly that requires explanation. Uh theists, or specifically religious people from different traditions, then uh advocate or or um suggest a miracle as an explanation for a certain anomaly. Right? So, the reports that we have about Jesus's disciples seeing him uh alive after he was killed, right? The That's the anomaly. The explanation for that anomaly is that uh God raised Jesus from the dead and supernaturally then allowed him to return and then appear to his followers, right? That's clearly a divine intervention. That's not something that can really happen through the typical order of things, through the way things normally go, right? Um

Likewise, the shroud, well, the idea there is that at the moment of Jesus's resurrection, or maybe later, depending on who you ask, but typically at the moment of Jesus's resurrection, some kind of divine action imprinted that image of Jesus onto the shroud. Right? That's the divine action there. In the case of uh miracle of the sun of Fatima, um as a vindication to to show that the messages that the children were receiving were really from God, or I'll I guess from the Virgin Mary, from God and originally. Not exactly sure how that works, but anyway, that's another issue. Um uh to vindicate those messages, God made it so that there was either either everyone's hallucinated seeing something, or there really was

something that moved in the sky that wasn't the sun. Again, less agreement there as to what the miracle actually was, um but at least God did something so that people observed something in the sky that was not explicable, that was not um the result purely of the natural course of events, right? So, but this may seem sort of obvious, but I think it's actually important to set things out very clearly as to what the data are.

There can be disputes about what the data are, obviously, but if you try to it's necessary to agree broadly on that first. And then we need to get clarity on what the explanation is. So, what data is it trying to explain and what how does the theory work? How does the hypothesis fit together and how does it account for the data? Um and what are what are then the contrasting hypotheses hypotheses that we're evaluating it that we're comparing it to.

Uh and then we have to assess the explanations on their explanatory merits, right? That's the approach that that I take. It's the approach honestly that many apologists at least claim to take. Um William Lane Craig, for example, claims to do this for the resurrection of Jesus and um in my debate about the shroud, the um uh that that was the there was a slide where there was a big table of different explanations and we had a sort of a similar approach, although we didn't have as much time to talk about that as I would have liked, but uh the the the point is that this is this approach of um comparing the explanations on their explanatory merits is my video is frozen. That's not a good sign. What's going on here? Oh, we're

back. Sorry about that. Uh this approach of comparing explanations on explanatory merits is I think the right approach. It's essentially what scientists do or supposed to do and obviously even in philosophy as well and uh it's what apologists often claim to do. Whether they do it or not or how well they do it is another question. So, I I don't think it should be too controversial. You could maybe disagree about the exact way we should do that.

You can disagree about the facts to be explained and how to characterize the explanations, but I think uh that is the best method that we have for trying to determine um what really happened or you know, what what is real in the world. I will say that there is a there is an alternative approach, which is the method of exclusion. Basically, that the the method is to try to exclude natural causes and then if you can exclude or reject all natural causes, then you uh default to a miraculous explanation.

I want to come back to that again as well cuz I think that that's a highly problematic explanation. Um Uh so sorry that that's a highly problematic approach. But the point is here the point that I'm trying to get to is once we have tried to once we've established what the facts are and what the rival hypotheses are, we need to then have some method of of assessing a miraculous explanation against a naturalistic explanation or like any other type of explanation, even even ones that are non-naturalistic but non- uh miraculous, which could be like a demonic um agency or something like that, right? We have to have some way to do that.

And this is really what I wanted to discuss here because um Uh this is a nice one. There is at least one confirmed miracle. Habermas actually finished his books. Well, it's one book, right, with four volumes. I I don't know how you define a book now that I think about it. Yeah, maybe one day I'll get around to covering um at least some of that. Uh there's there was talks of a BA on that, but I don't >> [laughter] >> I don't know that Nathan wants to do that. And Camille's was busy with other stuff. Anyway, maybe it's someday uh that'll be another miracle if that ever happens.

So what what's the key thing that I want to get to here? In my discussion about the Shroud and the resurrection of Jesus, we didn't talk about this with respect to the miracle of the sun at Fatima. And part of that was cuz uh Ethan actually didn't specifically say he didn't want to talk about this uh sort of more methodological issue. But in in the in the other two cases, um I specifically tried to ask what their the the Christians' proffered or like preferred explanation was and how that accounted for the facts um and I think in both cases there was a reluctance to be very clear about that or also feeling that they wasn't necessary for them to clearly articulate what their explanation was more than saying God did it essentially. Uh this

is something I've also criticized William Lane Craig and other um well Habermas and other apologists for doing as well where they just don't really say what their hypothesis is other than maybe two cliche sentences of like God did it to vindicate his message or something like that, right? Now I I think that this is the crux of the issue as to why miraculous ex- miraculous explanations never work and maybe never can work but at least don't in practice. Um but the problem that people misunderstand it and this came up in one of the debates, I forget which, is that people people hear this as a Humean argument. And in some ways it is a Humean argument but there's different ways to interpret what Hume was saying here.

Um One understanding of what Hume was saying about miracles is that the a a miracle is a violation of the laws of nature but laws of nature are by definition exceptionless and therefore there can't be violations of the laws of nature so there can't be miracles. That that's one understanding of of what Hume was saying. Uh another understanding is that our evidence for the laws of nature being exceptionless is based on um universal testimony or near universal testimony. And that's always going to be greater than the testimony against uh the the testimony in favor of the miracles that they are exceptions to the laws of nature. Um And Hume said we should reject the greater miracle which is the greater miracle in his view being

that uh so so he said that either there was an exception to the laws of nature which we have universal or near universal testimony for or these people are lying or mistaken or confused or something like that. And so he says we should reject the greater miracle that either they're wrong or confused or lying versus that there actually are real exceptions to the laws of nature. So, that that's the sort of another understanding of Hume. Um what I'm saying is related to that, but it's not quite the same as either of those points, at least as I understand it.

What I'm actually saying is this. If we are to what we should do is assess miraculous and non-miraculous explanations using the same criteria. We should put them on the same basis and treat them with equal standing. That doesn't mean you have to give them equal prior probabilities. It means that methodologically uh we should assess them using the same broad approach.

Now, that that's interesting because that's normally the sort of thing the apologist or the Christian or the theist would say that they're usually trying to get people to take their miracle claims seriously. Uh and I'm I'm not necessarily saying you should take their miracle claims seriously, but I'm saying if we're to try if we're to if we're to do if we're to investigate them if we're to discuss explanations, we should uh apply the same methodological standards and explanatory like method of assessing explanations to both of them.

And this is crucial. Um because despite what the theists often say that they're just asking for their explanations to be taken seriously or to be uh seriously addressed almost never do apologists actually want this, at least in my experience of reading and talking to people. Uh they never want this because once you actually do that, when you subject a miraculous explanation to the same scrutiny and using the same methodological processes by which we rightly subject naturalistic explanations to scrutiny like scientific rigor or even like philosophical rigor, when you do that, uh they they fall apart or they change the subject, the the apologists. They they they never want this.

Almost never, right? Um So, let's let's take some examples of this, right? So, and what what I mean by this, like subjecting them to the same criteria. So, if I say that a person took an action, in order for that to be reasonable, like I mean this this happens in the course of law all the time. When you say that someone did this, you need to convince the jury that someone uh uh committed a crime. They did a certain specific series series of actions that constituted the crime. So, you need to establish a few things. First of all, you typically need to establish that the person was like present in at that context.

Uh and that they were well, present at that context and had the capacity to do that thing. So, if you're claiming that they lifted up an object and threw it at someone, for example, or smashed a window or something, but they wouldn't have physically been capable of lifting that object, then that really makes it unlikely that they did so. Now, maybe there's some other, you know, there could have been some other circumstances that allowed them to do that, but generally, we require that people are able to have done the thing. So, this requires things like that they were present at the time and place and that they had the physical capabilities or intellectual, they had the knowledge to do something, for example, if it

requires specific knowledge, password to access a computer or something, right? Or other skills that might be relevant. So, they have to have the ability. Um The second thing is that we usually require people have a motive. Now, that's not necessarily essential, but it helps a lot to motivate the plausibility of something. Um Normally, we think that people act for reasons, that there's some rationale or logic behind what they're doing. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean that it would make sense to another person, um or that it is in the long run in their own interest, or that ultimately it is a sensible thing. But, it just means that there's some uh essentially some reasons for it, um or or causes for it. So, this could be

that they were angry, right? That that's a that's a motive or a a cause why people act in certain ways. Or they were drunk, or they were jealous, or they wanted they were greedy, they wanted to to gain something, or they were scared, right? Um or there was of course those are simple relatively simple emotions. You have to put them in the context of what the person is accused of and like what the relevant actions and goals are.

But the point is that we regularly appeal to this and often tacitly like we don't even necessarily think about exactly in ordinary conversations what the reasons or like rationale are, what the motive is. Often we take it for granted that we understand that there are all sorts of things that people do in virtue of being human beings that that are plausible motives. But but it's it's normally less plausible if you say that someone did took a specific action that's just inexplicable.

Um Social media has I think highlighted that people do otherwise inexplicable things. Although even there it's often to get attention. And so that is actually the rationale why people do it. They film themselves doing ridiculous things, put it on TikTok because they want the attention and that's a motive for a lot of people. Now, that's not foolproof. Sometimes people are not capable of actually exercising any kind of rationale and so act for reasons that are just totally inexplicable or sometimes we just don't understand the reasons. But at least I think most of the time we can understand somewhat of the motivations or psychological factors that lead someone to take an action and that's an important part of rationalizing their

behavior. So these are these are two things that we um try to identify or try to focus on when we're um assessing the plausibility of someone having done something. It's that did they have the means to do it and did they have a motive to do it? Um Now, when we are um assessing explanations more broadly, obviously appealing to the motivations of people or the actions of people is is one aspect of that, but also there's phenomena in the natural world and so there we look at causes and effects and physical processes, chemical, biological, geological, meteorological, um um whatever it might be.

So, we appeal to those as well. And often there's an issue that we don't know the exact boundaries of what's possible, like in the case of the miracle of the sun. Exactly how defined can the sun be when it's behind a cloud? So, Ethan and I both agreed that you can see the sun behind clouds um and it can look like a disc, but where we disagreed was on uh essentially how well defined the disc would be relative to how easy it was to it would be to see that uh defined disc without uh it feeling painful. Uh and that's still a point which um I would like to get better sources on because I couldn't find anything definitive either way apart from a lot of people testifying that they have seen similar things and photos that seem to indicate that such a thing

is possible. But, Ethan vehemently claimed it was not um basically just by assertion and then he referenced some simulation that we didn't actually see. So, anyway, I I hope that we can get some clarity on that cuz that seems to be a fairly testable point. But, the point is that's just an example of the sorts of things that come up when we're assessing mechanisms um in the natural world. So, we appeal to psychological processes of of motivations and means that physical capabilities people have and psychological pressures on them, as well as then uh aspects of the physical world processes and causal forces and so forth.

Now, the key thing is that all of those are reasonably well constrained. Not fully constrained. We don't know the exact constraints of what is possible chemically, biologically, or even physically, um and we certainly don't know what the exact constraints are in terms of what a certain person would or could do. But, we have a lot of background knowledge that constrains those things quite sharply and makes things certain things much less likely than others.

Um you can think of all sorts of examples where certain behaviors would be just very hard to understand because that's not what people typically do. Likewise, um certain phenomena would be hard to understand naturally because that's not the way chemistry or biology or meteorology or whatever typically works, and we don't necessarily know of a mechanism that could explain that.

There are, of course, things in the natural world that we that exist or that do happen that we don't understand. So, just because we can't rationalize it or give a mechanism for it doesn't mean that it's impossible, but generally we think of that as lowering the quality of that explanation if we if we can't rationalize it in terms of known mechanisms and processes, right? So, that's all fine and good, and that's how we assess explanations like kind of everywhere else. Again, in law and in science, um, in in politics and so forth, or it's how we should do it, I think. But but now I want and that's and that's generally what the apologists do when you discuss these issues with them, when you postulate the RH BS model or um the

medieval medieval origin of the shroud with the um the the bar relief and the rubbing, or the um or the uh thin clouds that that veiled the sun and uh allowed people to see it as a disc without it hurting their eyes. And and so forth, right? The they pick at all of the details and ex- in excruciating detail analyze how plausible those um how plausible it is that those mechanisms could give rise to the phenomenon.

Um, and that's broadly, I think, what we should be doing. So, that's that's assessing the naturalistic explanations for the data, right? But remember what I'm my point is that we should apply the same criteria, the same methodology to both explanations, the naturalistic one and the miraculous one. So, let's look at the miraculous side of things. Now, the first thing excuse me.

The first thing to note is that a miraculous explanation, the way I've characterized it, is defined by a is defined in terms of a divine action and intervention. So, all miraculous explanations involve the exercise of God's volition to intervene and do something specific that so as to change the outcome or to change what happens in a given circumstance. So, that means that it's a personal explanation, an agentic explanation necessarily. And in fact, it's it's almost entirely that.

Now, uh a theist may appeal to other processes as well that could in combination with a miracle give rise to the certain facts. So, it's not like every bit of it has to be miraculous, but the miracle is the core to it which sets in motion everything else, right? So, the core of the explanation is always agentic. It's always personal and intervention. So, there are no natural forces or laws that are applicable in the way that they are to a naturalistic explanation. There's no laws of physics or chemistry or biology or meteorology or material science or psychology or anything else that's relevant cuz we're talking about God.

And he has none of those constraints, right? Um but but even the psychological aspects that we think about in terms of like, well, the means and the motive that I talked about before, that's how we assess how plausible it is that a person would do something. Unfortunately, neither of those are particularly relevant when it comes to God, either. Obviously, means is not relevant because God is omnipresent, omnipotent, uh and omniscient, so he can do anything that's logically possible, so that doesn't rule out anything at all.

Um and then as to motive, well, would God do this or not? Now, that's the tricky one because theists usually claim to believe some sort of theology which tells them at least some things something about God's nature and then what he would or would not be likely to do. But that's often often very poorly constrained. And so, there's apart from perhaps blatant atrocities and for many people not even those, uh God can kind of be expected to do kind of anything. If you look at say the Bible or Quran or even like Hindu scriptures and elsewhere, there's all sorts of uh divine interventions and actions that are reported uh that are just really weird and don't make any obvious sense, not to mention all of the extra miracle claims that people from

different traditions make. Um of course they're you don't have to accept all of them, but the point is it's very unclear what if any um motivations or motives or purposes can be appealed to antecedently to explain divine actions. Remember that the whole point of a divine action in a miracle in a miracle is that God set the universe in a certain way acting in accordance with certain laws and then he in certain instances he modifies that he changes it.

This already is sort of puzzling because it's not like God didn't know that that would happen initially. So why didn't he just set it up so that the way that he wanted to it to happen would have happened. Already there's a bit of a tension in the very definition of what a miracle is as to understand in terms of understanding the motive behind it. Now again, there's ways around this because you could say God has a motive that he just likes to work that way maybe to make his hand more evident or something.

I'm not sure. Maybe he just likes to be involved. But sort of this is the problem because they don't they don't seem to be any constraints on someone's motives. Now this is just not how human psychology works. People can have very weird psychologies. But almost all behaviors that humans engage in we we generally try to and I would say generally succeed in rationalizing those behaviors in accordance with some kind of motives.

Maybe not 100% but to a large degree like the main motives of like um hunger and thirst and warmth and acquiring wealth and attention and you know friendship and connection and lust and um addictive behaviors and and so on and a bunch of other things as well, right? You can you can explain a lot at least in broad terms with those motives. But none of those motives apply to God.

Um the the only motive that he has I guess is benevolence or I mean they call him that he's jealous as well like he he has a motive for justice I suppose but then God's ways are not our ways. It's very difficult. I'm not saying it's impossible. I've always said that if you supply us sufficiently precise theology then you can maybe get predictions out of it but almost no one does this because it's it's it involves making very strong claims about God and his nature and and intended actions. So what I'm saying is we can't always exactly predict human behavior obviously but we actually have a lot of rich theory from like folk psychology as well as the findings from neuroscience and cognitive psychology and social psychology and

sociology and so forth about humans and how they act and what their motivations and limitations are. We have essentially none of that with respect to God. And also none of the other that are operative on naturalistic mechanisms laws of nature broadly speaking are relevant to God's actions at all. So what we have is a very rich body of theory and prior knowledge and constraints that are operative to assess the explanatory plausibility and the prior plausibility and the explanatory scope of naturalistic explanations.

And then when it comes to assessing the plausibility and explanatory powers go of divine interventions miracles we have almost nothing. All we really really have is whatever theology the apologist or like the miracle proponent wants to give us about who God is and what they're wanting to do. And that theology had better come prior to this miracle claim because obviously it can't be justified by the miracle claim because then it can't be evidence for the miracle claim like the theology has to already be there in order to have that prior plausibility.

Uh so this is the basis of the claim that I make that theistic theistic appeals to theistic actions like miracles theistic interventions can almost never succeed relative to naturalistic hypothesis naturalistic explanations even if those naturalistic explanations are not very good or not very plausible because unlikely things still happen in the natural world and if we have at least some mechanisms that we can point to which are at least consistent with how the natural world works in terms of how they stand or what people how people could behave even if a fairly a quite a rare occurrence.

The alternative is essentially entirely ad hoc. Let's take some examples to then illustrate this point with respect to the examples that I've been talking about. Uh just a quick look at uh the chat. Yeah, sorry. My camera keeps freezing. I hope Hopefully it unfreezes, but I'll keep talking. The um let's take the resurrection to start with. Now, I have said for years that the theistic the the the standard theistic explanation for the resurrection Oh, actually, I should take a step back and say what the facts are. So, I often respond to some version of the minimal facts, but I'm actually increasingly expanding this to maximal facts. So, I'm actually happy to take just pretty much everything that the Gospels say about Jesus dying and then

the tomb being empty and then Jesus his disciples having experiences of him appearing to them and so forth. Um Obviously, with the exception of the literal claim that he actually was did rise from the dead. That's the metaphysical part of the claim. That's the explanation behind it. Um But in terms of all the appearances and everything else, I'm happy to just accept those and even happy to take the idea that the Gospels were written by eyewitnesses, even though I don't think they were, but I don't think that that really hurts the naturalistic explanation really at all.

Um Or very little, let's say. All it rules out is some amount of legendary development. If the Gospels are written by eyewitnesses, and I don't even think you need to appeal to that. I think it did happen, but it's not necessary to give a plausible naturalistic explanation of of those facts. Now, um So, so that those are the facts, right? A bunch of people who knew Jesus reporting to have seen him after he died, and they also reported like eating with him and and touching him and things like this, okay?

So, I'm not going to rehearse my RHBS model here. I've got other videos on that, but you can put that to one side as one possible naturalistic explanation. There are of course others. Um What is the the alternative that the apologists have to give us? The best that I've ever come heard is that they simply say that God had a reason that God was uh motivated to vindicate Jesus's mission to humankind.

His salvific mission. And in order to do that, he raised Jesus from the dead. And Jesus then appeared to his followers as a vindication of his of his mission and his triumph over death. And did so on a number of occasions to show specifically that he had was not just a visionary the appearance, but he that was really bodily had returned. And that this um that this was why they they reported seeing him because he actually physically did appear to them.

Um and the reason for God doing that was was for because of the divine vindication of Jesus's a special mission to mankind. Uh that's that's the best I've ever gotten of as to like what the explanation is supposed to amount to. So, what's the problem with that as an explanation? See see In many debates, even atheists just sort of accept that that explains that that is at least a that that is explanatory satisfactory.

It's just in terms of like whether we need to postulate that or whether there's a naturalistic alternative. But I think that's entirely wrong framing. What we should do is take both of those explanations and assess them using the same methodological approach and then see which one uh comes out superior. So, the problem with the the problem as I've highlighted with any miraculous explanation is that in order to apply plausibility and explanatory power, it needs to be able to narrow down the range of possibilities. Because if you're I mean, I'm sure you've heard this. If your If your explanation can account for any possible outcome, then it's not an explanation. Uh it doesn't have any explanatory power. It needs to say why

this thing happened and not all of the other things that could possibly happen. That's exactly what appealing to natural laws and processes does. It says, "Look, we expect these certain outcomes and not others." The range could still be very large, but at least it's narrowed relative to all of the antecedently imaginable possibilities. Likewise, we can do that appealing to human psychology. There's many things that humans could possibly do.

Well, of all of the things that could happen, there's only a small range of things that humans are capable of doing. So, that narrows it down a lot. And then even smaller within that are the range of things that it's sort of psychologically plausible that particular people would do in particular context. If you go too far outside that, we start to get suspicious, especially if the actions are inconsistent with the person's prior character or their their interests or their their tendencies as as witnessed in other cases. That can happen, but again, the the further you go beyond the constraints provided by prior knowledge and theory, then the less and less plausible it becomes under a naturalistic explanation.

The problem with the divine explanation is there is no prior theory. Except for the fact that God is capable, allegedly, of doing anything that's logically possible. So, we have maximally widened the range of possible things that God could do in this in this context and provided absolutely no constraint at all in the way of theory or background knowledge about what he would be likely to do.

So, so any To emphasize this, any outcome that's possible naturalistically is also possible under God under a a case of divine intervention cuz God just could allow that thing to happen. Plus, he could do any number of other things that aren't possible naturalistically. And one way that I've been thinking about emphasizing this is let's let's just suppose that God had a reason to resurrect Jesus as opposed to anyone else who lived as opposed to do anything else other than resurrecting him or in addition to resurrecting him.

Let's just make those assumptions, which we shouldn't make, because where did those come from? Um and I'll talk more about that, but let's just highlight the point of to whom does Jesus appear after the resurrection? Because that's one of the data points that Jesus appeared to his disciples and some of the other immediate followers, but nobody else. Let's consider what is possible for God to have done.

How many people lived on Earth at the time of Jesus? I think it's something like 200 million. God could have, or let's say Jesus could have appeared to any subset of those people, literally any subset. Because he's God, right? He can He can appear to different people at the same time, or he can appear to some people but not others, even if they're together or or if they're separated. Uh and of course there were multiple appearances, so he could do this sequentially. Any subset of the people who were alive at that time God have could have appeared to. Of course he could have appeared to people before or after that as well, but like [laughter] we we have to constrain it somehow if to talk about it, right?

So, um So, 200 million people, um how many how many sets are there out of 200 million? I I don't even know. It's a incredibly large number, right? The number of uh distinct sets that you can make um uh the number of combinations for of 200 million. That that's unbelievably huge. Now, I want to ask you, prior to knowing who what what the account says, like what prior to knowing what it says in in our accounts about uh who reported seeing uh Jesus, what is the prior probability that you would expect Jesus to only appear to people who knew him while he was alive, like his immediate followers?

Bearing in mind that God could have appeared to any subset of the people who were uh alive on Earth at the time, including everyone or any subset that he wanted. Now, I would suggest that's infinitesimally small. Unless you offer some kind of theory as to why God is more likely to appear to people who already knew him while he was alive. Maybe you can come up with something, but then I would ask, what is the justification for that? It seems that that's been that hypothesis seems tailor-made just to account for the data that we have, and that is the mark of an ad hoc uh hypothesis, and not and therefore uh it's that's going to count poorly uh with respect to assessing the plausibility and the explanatory scope of that explanation.

Now, let just take this specific point. Remember that we don't know Remember what I said about the constraints that we have with psychology and sociology and so forth, geography and other things as well. We don't know exactly what the the constraints of those are. People debate about exactly how likely it is that people would report seeing someone who um had come back from the dead as still being alive, even if they didn't really see them. What are the constraints on memory contamination and distortions, and um uh social influences, and uh expectation effects, and uh sociological effects, and um arousal, and and all of this sort of stuff.

People debate about that, and and that comes up when I, you know, discuss the RSBS model. That's fine. We should discuss those things, and that's how you address the success of these explanations. Uh somehow no one ever wants to talk about what are the expectations about the limits of God's or God's reasons for appearing to particular subsets of people, but that's exact that's exact the exact parallel.

What are the constraints operative on who could reasonably uh on what it is reasonable to postulate uh psychological and sociological principles as giving rise to experiences of Jesus. Like, what's reasonable versus what's reasonable to postulate about whom God would appear to. Now, I I've always said that we might differ to exactly the explanatory uh limits of the psychological and sociological processes, but they very clearly predict that those experiences are going to be restricted to people who knew Jesus, or at least, you know, like were familiar with him who heard about him who had direct contact with those people in that particular region.

Um it's completely impossible from what we understand about how humans work and time and space that people from contemporary China or the Americas um could have had such experiences. And while maybe technically possible, extremely unlikely we would expect such experiences from say the Roman Senate or Roman aristocracy you know elsewhere in the empire. Um who were very distant from this process. Maybe theoretically possible in terms of like the message could have got to them but very unlikely given their context and their interests and background, right? So we actually have not precisely but very sharply constrained expectations about who would report these sorts of things with respect to Jesus you know Jesus' appearances.

Of course that doesn't always happen when a prophet is killed but we do have background knowledge that expectations are very relevant and we have other cases where similar sorts of things are reported not exactly but what I'm saying is while we can't constrain things fully and while the evidence is not um it's not definitive, we have very clear expectations about what subset of the global population is likely to report or it's even possible for them to report seeing seeing Jesus appear to them after he died, right?

In the case of God we have no such expectations. And any expectation that the apologist comes up with I argue is just entirely ad hoc. Well if Jesus would want to appear to his his followers because like he knew them and cared about them and wanted them to know what happened to him. Well like I guess but that it doesn't entail that he would appear to them bodily, right? There's any number of other ways God could have communicated to that could have communicated that to them.

And also anyway, that's not the question. The question is why not appear to anyone else? Why just that subset? Um also then there's remember the postulated reason for this appearance in the the whole resurrection and appearances is to vindicate Jesus' divine status. But this just doesn't fulfill that purpose very well at all. It only vindicates it to people who essentially already believed it. I mean it depends which gospel you read as to how much they were doubting I suppose, but at most it vindicates to a small number of people who are already predisposed to believe that. It doesn't really vindicate it to anyone else.

Nor is it really anything that can be verified for believers or people who might be interested later on. And of course the apologist have responses to this. Usually the responses are to say, "Well, no matter how convincing a miracle was, there could always be a one that was even more convincing." This is one of the dumbest responses that I think I've ever heard of because it it doesn't answer the question at all. It's like what why does the miracle what why does the the question is why does the divine action do a very poor job at accomplishing the extensive aims that motivated that action?

And the answer given is well, but you could probably always think of an even better way that God could have accomplished that action. Well, maybe it's not clear. Maybe there is an absolute best way that it whether we know it or not would achieve it. But even if that's true, that's just a problem for the God concept of him being the maximally great being with no limits. That's not actually a response to the question. The question the the question and applied implied objection is that the explanation the the explanation of the miracle is supposed to be accounting for the facts by invoking a divine purpose which then led to divine action to bring to actualize the purpose that motivated that action.

Yet if the action does a very poor job at actualizing at achieving the extensive purpose relative to the agent's goals and and and abilities, then it's very implausible that that motive that that is actually an explanation of the action. It's like, you know, an analogy would be to say that the thieves broke into the bank and stole only $10, even though they had plenty of time and they had room in their suitcase, um and, you know, they took their time and they they sat around waiting in the in the vault and there was no, you know, you rule out other possible explanations Of course, we can do that because we have other other theory behind why we think that Well, what are some reasons why thieves might not have stolen as

much money? You can actually already come up with a bunch of reasons cuz we have background theory. But, the point is if you rule out that theory, it's just inexplicable. Like, it doesn't make any sense. Well, they broke into the bank presumably to steal money because they wanted to get rich, but then they took only $10. You would immediately think there's something else going on. There must be some other motive behind breaking into the vault because it's not explained seemingly by a monetary motive because they did such a poor job of achieving at that motive. So, this is a very simple example to highlight the point that if the entire, remember what I was saying before that a miracle is entirely in terms of its explanatory

force and the structure, it's entirely an appeal to agentic um an agentic cause and like a um a personal explanation in in appealing to the reasons of some sort of agent, that's all there is to to appeal to here. And so, if that doesn't get off the ground, if the if the um ostensive purpose of the divine action is poorly achieved by the the the facts that we observe, then that renders that postulated explanation very implausible, just like the same thing we would say about any appealing to any other agent action relative to an ostensive purpose.

So, the the apologists, the pro-miracle claims are in a a double bind here. When we assess the miracle claim alongside and using the same principles that we use to establish a naturalistic claim, first of all, they have to have some way of constraining the range of possible actions cuz God could do essentially anything. And the only real way to do that that I've ever seen or that really makes any sense to me is to appeal to some sort of theology to give a story about why God would do certain things.

And that story is generally going to be just as ad hoc as the thing that they're or just as um requiring of an explanation as the thing that they're trying to explain cuz they have to narrow down such a huge range to such a specific action without the benefit of any prior theory or prior uh constraints of like prior knowledge, which is what we have in the naturalistic case. That's the whole point of science and like inquiry is to accumulate a body of knowledge and facts and observations and regularities that we can appeal to to constrain expectations.

We don't have that in the case of God because they they just isn't anything that's that's that's agreed upon that can be um used to constrain his actions to any plausible way. Or to any significant extent. Unless you just then develop a very extensive theology. Um of course the challenge is to try to motivate that theology in a way that it's not entirely just ad hoc in order to account for that specific miracle. And I I acknowledge that it's theoretically possible that someone can do that. I just don't know of any real attempts.

And certainly when I've raised this with multiple apologists over many years, I feel like they barely even tried to do this let alone have offered a successful attempt. So, the first problem is the narrowing down of the things that God would potentially do or like could do. The second problem is establishing the plausibility of connecting a motive to a specific action when when nearly always the observed outcomes don't match the ostensive motive for achieving them.

So, to summarize, what I'm saying is that when we assess divine action as an explanation for some sort of unusual phenomenon or or set of facts, we should assess it in the same way that we assess naturalistic explanations which appeal to human actions and or naturalistic processes and forces. And in doing so, we assess their explain the explanations of plausibility and explanatory scope and power with respect to background knowledge that we have sort of antecedent to this specific investigation. So, you know, scientific knowledge, historical knowledge, general knowledge that we have about human psychology and how humans tend to behave and the way the world works in various various other capacities, right?

Um we should do the exact same thing when we're assessing God's actions. But the problem is we can't because there's no constraint on God's actions other than omnibenevolence, which generally is consistent with kind of any outcome because there's all sorts of atrocities that people normally believe that and all of the evils that exist in the world. So, I don't really think that works as a constraint. Um and then well, logical consistency, but again, that's a very loose constraint. So, there's there's virtually no constraints on what God could do. Um and then the only other thing that the apologist have is to invoke a specific motive, but A, that's generally ad hoc, and then B, the motives almost always do a poor job at

accounting for the specific specific observations that because the just um just like the you know, robbers taking only $10 from the vault and leaving everything else, that just is not an an outcome that's consistent with the motive of greed. Um we would we would almost always reason if we saw that that there's something else at play, there's some other reason, there's other factors that we haven't um that we haven't incorporated yet such that the explanation that they that they um robbed the vault just to steal $10 because they were really greedy just doesn't make sense cuz of the motive doesn't match the the action. Likewise, God's motives for these miracles just which is usually some sort of divine vindication as we've just seen in the

example of the resurrection. I'll give a few other examples in a moment. They just don't match the outcome because the miracles are just always really underwhelming and um ephemeral and equivocal and um very limited in in space and time. So, this is why I think that appeals to miracles don't work. It's not because of a general impossibility that miracles could, it's that miracles can't be used in um to establish the that appeals to miraculous explanations can just never or in practice never win when assessed on a level playing field with naturalistic hypotheses because of the complete absence of constraints operative on God and the inability of anyone to come up with the even remotely plausible motivations that match the

actual very limited miracles like you know alleged miracles that we actually observe. So in order to get apologetics I think have some sort of conception of this or many of them do because they as I said earlier try to avoid at all costs assessing their explanatory model on the same playing field as a naturalistic explanation. Usually what they all try to do is just pick apart the naturalistic explanation which would be fine as long as they were applying the same standards to their own explanation in terms of willing to um flesh it out in detail, put everything on the table and subject it to the same sort of scrutiny. But because they're they're incapable of doing this or at least unwilling to make all of the assumptions necessary that would that

would be about God's motives and and purposes that would be necessary to actually do that um they just in my experience generally always shift the burden of proof or change the subject or avoid saying really anything about why we should believe that the the miracle is actually a good explanation. So this this is the meta point is that when placed on a on a level playing field miraculous versus naturalistic explanations miraculous explanations essentially never are able to do a good job.

Hypothetically I'm open to the possibility that they could but I can't really conceive of how that would work how you would have enough theology to then to to constrain the range of possibilities to account for this specific outcome whilst also that theology then not being entirely ad hoc um and and just just concocted in order to account for this specific uh outcome.

And um so I'm open to that as a theoretical possibility, but I think it's very unlikely to be possible and I've certainly not seen it come anywhere close. So, this is why I think that it's so important to really hold the apologists to account and get them to say what their explanation is, what God specifically did and why he did that, and then assess that using exactly the same scrutiny and and methods that we would use to assess any other type of claim and and any type of other naturalistic claim.

Okay, so that's the point I wanted to make. I'll then want to go through and talk about applying that. I I just did that in the case of the resurrection. I want to do that now uh with respect to the shroud and the um miracle of the sun. Um just to sort of nail the point in, but just first um a quick look at chat. Uh welcome everyone. Yes, always um always happy to be here.

Thanks very much. That was responding to this person, but nonetheless I'm glad you are here. Yeah, so um so this is what Christians would normally say God wanted the disciples to preach the gospel. Obviously, that's the Christian view, but doesn't really answer the question. So, the remember this this is the exact problem, right? The ostensive purpose of God raising Jesus and then Jesus appearing is to vindicate his divine status. Now, now maybe actually that's not the purpose. Maybe it was purely to instigate the missionary work of the church. Um that that's a little bit of a different claim. I mean, I suppose they could be both, but you know, they're actually different purposes and uh we can assess them separately even if

there's a mixture of motives. But, um let's say that the primary purpose of Jesus appearing to his disciples was to instigate missionary activity. First of all, uh we need to assess whether the uh whether that's that's a thing that God would be likely to do. Now, that's going to depend on your prior theology. It's not at all obvious to me why God suddenly wants to instigate missionary activity when he doesn't seem to have been very interested in this for a very long time, uh particularly not outside the Jew not outside the Jewish people. So, we already have an issue here about why God has this specific objective at this specific time.

Um and almost what all of the answers that Christians have to this are in direct response to the fact that this is what they believe happened. So, they're all ad hoc as far as I'm concerned, every explanation that's that's been developed for this, and not very explanatory type. But, then the other thing is, even if we accept that God had a a purpose of doing that, does the action match the purpose?

Why does an appearance of God uh after having died and then risen from the dead? What does that have to do with starting a missionary work? There's any number of ways you can start missionary work that don't involve that. And it seems that it doesn't really fit very well with the idea that God wants to evangelize the world. Isn't that the purpose? Um yet it starts with a very small group of people from one uh geographic location, which even after 2,000 years still hasn't reached many parts of the world.

The ostensive purpose doesn't match the actual event that we're trying to explain. And in order to deal with that, the apologetics of Christians just come up with any number of further ad hoc hypotheses, usually which come down to something about the problem of evil. Um and the world being imperfect and whatever, or God's ways are mysterious. Well, that's just as far as I'm concerned an admission that the explanation isn't is rubbish, that it doesn't have any explanatory or very poor explanatory scope and power because it can't explain why certain things happened, and requires a whole lot of ad hoc postulates in order to uh narrow the range of possi- narrow the range of possibilities enough to account for the specific facts.

Moving on. Oh, sorry. Here, you should ask Ethan to join the stream to talk about this objection. That is a hideous image here. I'm not sure which objection you're referring probably the point about God's like purposes. Well, Ethan wasn't interested in talking about that in in our debate. It did come up briefly in one of the questions, but um Yeah, I mean I'll I'll I'll go through I'll talk a bit more about the miracle of the sun in a moment, but I do intend to address some of the specific aspects about what we discussed in that discussion in a future stream or a future video.

But specifically we just really focused on naturalistic explanations at that point and that was part of why I wanted to talk about this because I'm interested in assessing the other side of the ledger which is does the theist or does the apologist have a credible explanation to offer of their own? Irres well, not irrespective, but alongside assessing the the plausibility of the naturalistic explanation and again, both should be done with the same amount of rigor using the same methodology. Um

Let's see. Just having a quick look. Okay. Um So, thanks everyone for commenting. Feel free to add comments or questions. I'll just keep going to talk about the two other examples that I mentioned. So, with this general point. So, we talked about the resurrection. Let's talk about the shroud. The Shroud of Turin. Um This one probably is going to receive the least support from other Christians cuz many people don't believe in the shroud even many Catholics, but um Likewise with the miracle of the sun, but regardless it's the the mythological purpose that I'm trying to emphasize here. So, from people who believe in the shroud generally claim that the purpose of God um that that so they account for the shroud in terms of

God having a purpose of, well, vindicating the resurrection, essentially. It's more or less the same argument, just through a different means. Um, and, uh, some people that try to offer some more specific explanation about the image formation. Um, it's sort of unclear what the purpose of that is, because you can just say that God directly imprinted the image in that way onto the shroud. Uh, and I don't know that it makes much of a difference either way, because if God used some intermediary mechanisms, then you can still ask the question of why he selected those mechanisms to produce that specific image. Um, but anyway, So, again, the the the the questions that we would assess, if we're assessing, for example, why would a

human produce that image on the shroud? We don't know for sure. I, in the debate, highlighted two possibilities. Uh, the one that's traditionally been assumed is that it was produced, um, in order to mislead people, in order to make money, to pass it off as an authentic relic. Um, that is a very understandable and very plausible motivation that we know people have and that we know many people did in the Middle Ages. We have many records of this from the time and many exa- examples of of relics that have survived. So, that's one possible explanation. The other explanation is that it wasn't intended to deceive, it was intended to be a religious icon to, um, essentially, help to direct people's worship, um, just like any other sort of

well, many other depictions of Jesus. Um, and it was later sort of either misused or misconstrued, and people then came to believe that it was a relic rather than simply an icon. Um, Now, both of those are very understandable and plausible explanations, right? The main issue with the shroud comes to the question of could the artist have produced that image? It's the means to have produced that image with the technology at the time. And also the question of why would they have chosen that method of producing the image, which is relatively unusual, instead of like painting or something else or carving in wood?

And and that's a fair thing to ask and I think that's one of the things that's interesting about the shroud is that to my knowledge that's a very unusual method of producing an image at that time. Um So, I think it's fair to discuss and ask those questions, but the point I was highlighting is that at least the motive for producing the image is clear and I think that we can say plausible things, not answer every question, but say many plausible things about the means by which they could have produced that image using the tools and limitations that people had at the time.

So, So, um so much for assessing the naturalistic explanation. Now, let's turn to the other side of the ledger and apply the same criteria to assessing the miraculous explanation. So, first of all, we should assess why would God do this? Just as we assess why would a person do this? Why would God do this? And as I said, the ostensive reason is to vindicate Jesus's resurrection, presumably, or something similar to that. Um Again, but if we're then to critically analyze that, we have to ask, so does the action, like the in this case it's a it's a an artifact and also it's sort of influence on history, does that match the ostensive purpose as well?

What the heck did I mute myself? Like that was just bumped the microphone and somehow that was a miracle in and of itself. Anyway, um does God's um uh ostensive purpose of vindicating the resurrection match uh the the properties of the shroud and its influence on history relative to God's limitations and sort of other ostensive facts that we know about him like his omnipotence and so forth.

It seems to me that it absolutely does not because the shroud didn't appear in history until the 14th century and even then it wasn't very widely known until the negative photographs were published in the I think late 19th or early 20th century and then it achieved worldwide attention and attracted a lot more investigation. Of course even still to this day most people I would wager have not in the world have not heard about the shroud or don't think too much about it even if they had.

Now relative to all of the other things that God could have done to vindicate the resurrection that could have affected people in time and place in in all sorts of other ways why this method? It's not really clear at all. There's so many things that God could have done that would have better vindicated his miraculous resurrection. The shroud just really doesn't do a good job of matching what you would expect.

There's also further factors like for example the fact that it carbon dates to the Middle Ages that make that even less plausible. But even if it carbon dates to the first century I think that it would still be a very poor explanation. It would just be slightly less poor. Um So the when we ask what the purpose of that a person had in creating the shroud and why they chose this specific method those are reasonable questions to answer. But we should also ask that of the case of the theistic explanation like the miracle. And when we do I just don't think that the theist has any plausible answers and often they get they'll suggest some things but then say well we don't really know and we don't and we can't really second guess God.

I've I've heard many people say things to this effect that it's not reasonable or fair to ask why God would take a certain action and not something else. And I think that this is just a habit that many Christians or other theists have gotten themselves into that to that they're sort of taught not to second guess God or ask these sorts of questions as well as that it sort of makes you uncomfortable if you start to ask these questions like hmm well if God has these objectives why wouldn't he do X Y or Z rather than what actually did happen which just doesn't seem to be a very good way of achieving those objectives. Now, that's the sort of a logic that we apply literally everywhere else, but somehow not to God. So, that's what

I'm saying. We have to apply that or we should apply the same criteria and broad methodology to assessing both explanations. When you do that, what you find is that there's a complete absence of any real theory or or constraints as to what God could do. He could come up with a shroud or he could come up with the true cross or any other number of icons or he could appear in the sun or the moon or or the the ocean or he could appear to everyone in the world at the same time or or he could make scriptures appear. Um like come up with anything wild and and crazy as you like, and God could do that. So, so how are we assessing the plausibility of a shroud relative to like anything else?

And then, when we even postulate that method, how well does then it fit with the extensive purpose? Not very well, I I I would argue. And the question is how how one can explain how that action how the existence of the shroud really does achieve God's alleged purpose in to any any significant degree. And usually, again, it's the same excuses and evasions um and ad hoc rationalizations that that one hears being provided when when one asks about this.

Uh well, yes, that's true. People do uh often parrot things without um without fact-checking. But is it really plausible that God would create an artifact like this so that 2,000 years later people could talk about it on podcasts? Like, is that the way God goes about doing things? Well, let's let's think. What's the ostensive reason? I mean, I'm not saying that this commenter was saying that, but what's the ostensive reason why God did this?

Does the effect match that ostensive reason relative to God's ability to do anything else? If a person with the power of God or even like near the power of God was trying to achieve a certain objective, would they choose this method? Would this be a reasonable method for someone to choose to achieve that purpose? And relative to all of the other things that they could do. There's a complete lack of constraint here.

Which means that I I think that any reasons given are just as to why this particular thing is expected is ad hoc. And the range of things that God could do is so much broader than the range of things that are that are um possible under naturalism. Because as I said, there's an absence of the same constraints of psychology and sociology and and history and cause and effect and natural processes and so forth that just don't apply to God.

All right, let let's bring it home and talk about the miracle of the sun. So it's it's much the same uh story here. Um the story that Ethan gave was that God's purpose in what what what Ethan thinks is that the uh some other uh that God made some other object luminous object appear uh in the sky uh around where the sun was um uh visible in the sky. And and then this luminous object sort of moved down and up again and disappeared after a few minutes. And that's what people saw at at Fatima.

And that the reason God did this was to vindicate the message of the um of the virgin appearing there. So that that's the explanation given. Now, again, just as we should critique critically analyze the psychological processes that I talked about with respect to the Marian apparitions and then the meteorological and um crowd psychology and other things that I talked about with respect to the miracle of the sun. Likewise, we should subject the the miraculous explanation to the same methodological scrutiny and use the same principles. So what is the extensive reason why God made this intervention? Well, I just said it's to vindicate, you know, the um Mary's appearance. Well, we're we're we're sort of already taken for granted

there that there's an appearance to vindicate um and one could question why is God in the business of commanding or allowing? I don't know exactly how it works. Virgin Mary to appear to particular people at particular times in history. As I documented on my video, more than half of these appearances are to children, like under-age children, which is a very strange choice for God to do. And I actually think, given the amount of attention and pressure that that places on the children, this is unethical. And so is not just is there no clear reason for God to do this? I think there's a clear reason for God not to communicate to humanity in that way.

But even aside from that, you have to then think that God is in the business of Marian apparitions for some reason, even though as far as I can tell, nothing that Mary said is in any way like novel. It's pretty standard Catholic teachings as far as I could tell. Although, you know, I didn't go through everything she said. So, maybe there's some things that I missed that were important there. There were a lot of talk about the war, for example, that was happening at the time. So, what exactly is the purpose of this is less clear. But even if you sort of take that for granted and then focus on specifically the miracle of the sun, what is God's purpose in making this luminous object appear? Well, to vindicate the message of of Mary.

Well, why first of all is that a plausible motive for God relative to all of the things that he could be in the business of doing? It doesn't normally vindicate the message of Mary with miracles like this. There are some other cases where there are claimed miracles. But this is pretty unusual. Like, for God, it's unusual. And relative to all the things he could do, like why is he vindicating it at all? Why doesn't the message just stand on its own?

But then even if he wants to vindicate it, why choose this method? Is this a reasonable way of affecting the alleged purpose? Well, not really because only was seen by the people who were there. Was not photographed. And there's not any way to sort of prove what people saw. People also saw rather different things. This is something that came up in the debate with Ethan. He claims that there was homogeneity. I think that that's not true. The homogeneity was basically we can look at the sun and it's doing weird stuff. That's the extent of the homogeneity in my view. But regardless, like why do it that way? That's not something that's visible to anyone else on the planet.

Uh not something that's visible to anyone in the future. It doesn't even have any clear connection to the Virgin Mary. It's something in the sky. And then there's even further things. Like why is God making it look like the sun, but it's actually not the sun? That feels deceptive to me. Now, you can probably come up with some sort of rationale for that. But like everyone thought it was the sun. But then Ethan thinks that it wasn't the sun. It was just like in the place of the sun, but then it moved. That's a very strange thing for God to do. Would anyone really say, and to seem to have heard having heard about this, that this is the sort of thing you would expect a God to do to vindicate a message from the Virgin

Mary, even taking it for granted that he wants to vindicate such a message? It's such a strange way to go about it. It's such an indirect and equivocal and bizarre way of doing it that doesn't really achieve anything very much. Yes, it strengthened the faith of some of the people there. But again, relative to how much he could have done that would have been much more impactful for many other people and much more verifiable.

He really seems to have limited himself not even just limited, but also in a very specific, odd, idiosyncratic way. Um and again, there are many there are many types of meteorological phenomena that God could have instantiated that would be completely impossible to explain under any um under any um prin- using any principles of um you know, uh atmospheric phenomena.

Ethan and I are debating about the exact properties of clouds and things like that. But you know, if the same thing was reported from people on different in different parts of the world who hadn't even heard anything about this, didn't know anything about the Virgin Mary, that would be much more difficult to explain um meteorologically. Or if there was even something that was observable about the sun that was objectively demonstrable uh by astronomers, that would be something else as well. There's so many things God could have done. Um, again, thinking about the range of possible even just meteorological or astronomical phenomena that he could have done. And what we have is something within the realm of in my view,

unusual but still explicable meteorology and sociology and psychology, right? It's the similar case to the resurrection appearances. Um, of all if we were to predict about who would be affected by the phenomena, it would just be people who were in the immediate surroundings. Um, there are a few uh, you know, we talked briefly about a few distant cases, but they were still quite close and connected to the phenomena. And also there's questions about the testimony.

But anyway, the point is that when we're looking at the constraints that are operative in the case of the naturalistic explanation, there's clear constraints of meteorology and time and place and and person and connection and and expectation and things like that. Uh, none of those are applicable in the divine case. And yet what we see is an outcome that is much closer more closely tied to the naturalistic constraints and not at all seemingly tied to or connected with God's um, unlimited powers and um, uh, sweeping objectives for humankind, right? So, hopefully I've made the point I've made my point fairly clearly that whenever there's a claim about these miracle about a miracle claim that God intervenes in a certain way,

if we're to if we're to assess that and respond to it, we should do it in a way that first of all, demands clearly that the uh, that there's a clear explanation of an account given as to what we're trying to explain and what the what the different accounts are trying to do, like what facts are they trying to account for and how they work, what the logic is. And then once that's presented, we should then go as about assessing the explanatory merits of those of those two um, explanations using the same methodological approach, using consistent standards and um, uh, it applying the same rigor and and sort of skepticism uh, to both sides.

And this is never what you see apologists do. It's always a hyper skepticism to anything that naturalists say to attempt to account for it. And an almost complete unwillingness to say anything about what their account is or to really give it any detail or structure or really try to motivate why we should think that God would act in this specific way and this specific context. And and no real attempt to assess the plausibility of God having those motivations or why he choose a specific means of of achieving those actions. So, why did God have that particular motive relative to all of the other things that he could be wanting to do? And then why did he choose this means to bring it about relative to all the other means that he could have that

many of which would seemingly achieve that motive to a much greater degree. This is the problem of the proponent of miracles. I don't think I see almost no apologists, no proponents of miracles even try to do this or to a very limited extent. And I've certainly, in my view, not seen anyone come close to to achieving this. Um now that that's a challenge. I presented this challenge for for years that to ask um to ask people who are religious, who appeal to miracles, of course not everyone does, but many do appeal to some kind of miracle in some form, some kind of divine intervention that they believe accounts for that they believe is is vindication of their faith. To to provide this level of sort of detail and rigor that and and consistency with

assessing so that we can assess it consistently with respect to naturalistic hypotheses. So, that's an open challenge that I think we need to be able to have that clarity and to be able to seriously discuss this in order to um really do a good job of of like intellectually and intellectually rigorous job of assessing the two competing explanations or classes of classes of explanations. Obviously, there's different miraculous explanations and different naturalistic explanations, so they're classes. But that's what I think is necessary and that's what I really think is lacking. It was lacking in all all these debates and discussions. Um I brought it up briefly in some of them and not not in the the um Fatima case

but the Miracle of the Sun case. Um, but you know, even then the details inevitably always focus on just trying to discredit naturalistic hypotheses. In my view, the time should be 50/50 spent or roughly 50/50 spent in assessing the explanatory scope, plausibility, and explanatory power of the miracle claim versus the naturalistic claim that's being proffered. Uh, that would be a more intellectually honest way of conducting these discussions. Um, but you see, the apologists don't want to do this cuz there's no way they can fill that much time. Um, and it's going to be very clear that they're going to be invoking all sorts of ad hoc um divine psychology or theology or rationalizations for why God did this specific thing at this specific time in

this specific way. That is just going to be very hard to make sound credible to anyone who doesn't already accept that particular way of looking at things uh in terms of like particular um views of God. Uh, it's much easier to just pick up problems that the naturalist has, which which they mostly always do if they're dealing with anomalous or unusual events that we we don't fully understand all of the details. So, there's always gaps.

Um, we we should expect that if even if the natural world is completely um uh is all that there is and that there's no supernatural or paranormal or any other sorts of forces. There's always going to be gaps in our knowledge and and unusual events one in a million one in a billion chances things that are at the boundary of what's normal or or possible. And um so, those things are always going to exist. Uh, it's reasonable for us to then ask about these, how to make sense of them. But, we shouldn't require the naturalist to have a complete and a fully detailed and worked out account of everything in order for us to reasonably infer that that is that some natural process is likely what happened.

Cuz we expect there to be limits to our knowledge and unusual and rare events to happen in the natural world. The question is can we plausibly account for them in a way that overall provides a better explanation than the contrasting uh theist or or miraculous explanation. That's the key. Not can the naturalist pull out um pull achieve an unreasonable accomplishment in terms of the comprehensiveness and um uh answering every question. And then only if they can do that will the miracle claim be be defeated. That that that's an absurd and very unbalanced methodology. The methodology should be uh treat them equally, give them equal time, and require them to achieve the same level of like plausibility and explanatory scope and power and so

forth. That's what I think these debates should be like. That's what I would like to be. And I think that uh that would help people to think about these things much more clearly than the typical, which is that the theist just says God did it, and then it's up to the naturalist to then uh dot every uh I and cross every T in order to prove every tiny little detail um in order to to refute that, which is just not how it should be, and and clearly not a fair or balanced way of of assessing these things.

Um Yeah, I mean, of course, if you just say that nature did it, that would be just as explanatory vacuously saying God did it, right? And some skeptics will say such things. Of course, sometimes that's that's sort of shorthand for a known process that it's perfectly fine to appeal to. But in cases where it's less clear, then it's important to then try to fill in those details a bit more and explicate them. But again, we shouldn't reject a naturalistic explanation for being incomplete or unlikely um if the if the miraculous explanation is even more incomplete and even less likely on the basis of antecedently accepted knowledge. And that's always what we have to do, always make that comparison in a fair way.

Uh All right. So, I think that I've made that point fairly clearly and and hammered that in. I'm just going to have a um a bit of a look at chat here. I see that things have gotten a bit uh heated. Something about as usual, it's completely impossible to follow the thread [laughter] of what people are talking about here. Um bop bop bop bah Uh okay, here we go. Question from Dale here. James, you mentioned the religion authentication motive, but what about my take Hang on.

What about my take that is also conducive to saving as many free will souls as possible? That I'm not quite sure I understand. What about my take that it is that it also is conducive Oh, the shroud is also conducive to saving as many free will souls as possible. So, free will is Oh. Sorry. Free will is uh certainly something that many Christians or theists generally and apologists appeal to as uh in order to account for some of the less explicable choices that God makes.

That they'll say that God doesn't want to make it too obvious uh because that infringes on people's free will. This is actually something that it would be good to discuss more in these uh these debates because I I think it does come it is one of the sort of core issues that many people uh well, I as I said, it's often raised as as some sort of response. Um and and I think that there's scope for more discussion about this. So, I don't want to present what I'm going to say as the final word.

Absolutely, we should be talking about this more. And and I think that that's sort of what I'm saying, like there's a need to devote more space in these discussions to these issues and not just um discussing all of the details of a potential naturalistic explanation. That's part of it. Uh but the other half of it's just as important, too. But anyway, in terms of what I think about free will, I think this is an incredibly weak explanation for um or response to the the concerns that God's actions don't appear to make sense.

I don't I can't really think of any other context in which we think that someone's free will is enhanced by maintaining them or allowing them to be in a state of ignorance about core issues with respect to which they are supposed to make a decision. So, when we uh let's take an example of um uh informed consent in medicine. Now, it's not possible to provide each patient with all information relevant to their procedure or medication or whatever because they wouldn't understand it, they wouldn't remember it, and it wouldn't be helpful for them.

So, there's a choice that physicians need to make about how to how much information to provide, how to provide it, how to explain it. And you know, obviously there's um, there's guidelines for how to do that and and it's it's not something that you can um, just write a a precise algorithm to do it. It's a case-by-case sort of decision. But there are there are principles there. And and one of the principles is that you should communicate everything that's essential for or important for the person to make an informed decision. So, everything that's going to be relevant for them to consider how their interests are shaped by uh, the different outcomes. So, so you should explain in a way that's understandable to that

person about what the different possible outcomes are and what reasons they may or may not have with respect to their own interests in taking one option or the other. So, typically that would be like, "Here's the condition that you have. Here's what we expect is likely to happen if you don't take this medication or if you you adopt this treatment option. Here's what we expect to be the outcome if you take the surgery or the treatment or whatever it is. Um, and then here are the possible side effects, and here are the costs, and then here are the other factors, right?

Here's how often you would have to get the treatments and how much it would cost and the side effects relative to how much it would prolong your life or what function you would gain." Right? And and we think about this clearly in terms of information that's essential for people to make an informed decision relative to their understanding and interest. So, that's one example. Of course, this can you can appeal to this in all sorts of other cases of consent as well.

People need to be given information that's understandable to them and that is actionable and that's relevant and the essential information that they need in order to assess whether or not one or other choice is more congruent with their own interests and their own values. Okay, now let's let's then take that and think about what God allegedly wants for us. So, according to this view, not everyone thinks this about God, but a lot of people do, God wants us to make choices, like to relate to him, to accept his sacrifice, or to follow his commandments. Different people say somewhat different things, but God wants us to respond in some certain way to him and his revelations to humankind, right?

Uh that that's his ultimate uh goal or purpose in relating to humans, but he wants us to choose freely to do that. He doesn't want to force that on us. Okay, we can argue about whether that's even something that makes sense for an omni- omnibenevolent being to do. I'm not at all convinced that free will is worth as much as some people say, but for the sake of argument, I'm going to grant that, right? Um Now, let's let's think about the case of informed consent in medicine. So, what would God as a benevolent and also omniscient, he's much more capable than a physician, mind you. He knows everything in all different outcomes that that could occur and exactly what people would and would understand. So, he's in a much higher level of capacity

than people are when we're doing this. So, minimally, what you would expect is that God would ensure that everyone who has ever lived uh who is at least capable of making these decisions, we can maybe ask questions about the intellectually disabled or infants who die early, and obviously people talk about that. Let's just put those aside for the moment and focus on people who are capable of making that decision, right? Um we would expect minimally that God would ensure that everyone had access to the core information about who God was, what he wanted of them, and what their outcomes would be if they chose to respond positively or to follow him, or or keep his commandments, or get baptized, or whatever it is that he

wants them to do, versus the consequences if they don't. Um and not just that people have heard it, but they actually understand it, or that it was communicated in a way that was understandable to them. Uh that's minimally what God would do. And not just that, but also provide some amount of evidence that was convincing that this was actually true, right? And this is that that that they have reason to believe these claims.

Uh this is sort of analogous to what physicians have to do, which is build trust with people that they um that they can trust what the um the doctors are saying because, you know, some people don't trust the medical system and some people have issues with um low medical knowledge or past history of people being exploited and so forth. So so that's a barrier that has to be crossed. Uh it seems that God would have reason to try to cross that barrier as well. So um he would in his desire to relate to everyone and provide them with the information necessary for them to make an informed decision, part of that would surely be minimally providing um clear and incontrovertible evidence that he was real and that these things were actually

coming from a divine being. Now, that doesn't have to amount to like appear like walking, I don't know, like being physically present with people at all times. Uh I'm not saying it has to be I I don't know exactly what it look like. This is the point because it's unclear what the constraints are. But I I use the phrase clear and um clear and convincing evidence.

Clear and convincing evidence is sort of minimally what we expect to present to people in like a court case or in the case of like when we're you know, a physician's trying to explain something. They'll show the result They may show the results of studies if that's appropriate if the person's capable of understanding that. Or advice from uh medical authorities to what level the person is capable of understanding. But that information, certainly if the patient requests it or that's going to be helpful for them to believe and to trust, that will be provided and that's what they should do.

Now, the trouble with God is that he seems completely uninterested in doing either of those things, at least for the majority of people who throughout history have not known that he even exists or what he wants of them, let alone have been given really convincing or clear evidence that he exists. And not just that a creator exists. Maybe you think that the creation is sufficient, like the existence of the world is in life is sufficient to establish that a creator exists. Even if you think that, that's not sufficient because that that's not actually action guiding. That doesn't help people to just make the choice about how they respond to God or what the way they should live their life in any specific way. That needs more than this. So,

this is a long answer, but I I I'm trying to motivate the the position that I have here rather than just give the the the a sort of a a two-sentence response. The point is, if the ostensive reason why God gives lukewarm or equivocal miracles um is to preserve people's uh autonomy, uh their free will so they can freely choose to relate to him, that action does not at all match the practice of informed consent in the way that I understand it or I know of it being practiced anywhere else.

The The action does not fit the ostensive motivation. The ostensive motivation would lead us to expect very clear and consistent, like historically and geographically, communications to all of mankind to enable them to clearly decide how to live their life, not worry about what God is or whether he exists or what he wants for them or or even having never heard of you know, a specific God or or what they want from them.

So, in order to say this, I think you have to make even more postulates about well, there's only some people that God wants to save. Well, then he has like a backup plan for these other people or uh you know, there's of course lots of different things that Christians and others believe about the fate of the unevangelized. But, this is my response to the idea that free will uh that that the um unimpressiveness of the miracles or the equivocal nature of the miracles is to save free will. I don't know of any other case where we think that someone's free will is enhanced by the evidence being weak. The evidence should be very strong so that it's absolutely clear that this is real and that the claims being made are coming from a divine

figure who has genuine authority over us and that these are the two the the clear choices that someone needs to make. Um I don't know of any other case where we would think that it's reasonable for someone to withhold evidence so that someone is somehow more free to choose. Someone's freedom is not enhanced by not knowing things as long as they're capable of understanding those things and they're relevant, right? Those are the two things. They have to be capable of understanding and the facts have to be relevant. So, I'm not saying that God would um necessarily even I necessarily expect him to impart all information.

That may not be possible to find out humans. Um but basic information about his existence and divine status and authority should be very clear and unequivocal because that enhances someone's freedom. It gives us more autonomy when we're in a position to make an informed choice. It doesn't in any way take away our free will. Even what my freedom is not somehow diminished by the fact that the existence of the sun is incredibly obvious. It's there and you can see it and it lightens everything.

No one denies the existence of the sun that I've ever heard of. Um I don't see how that in any way impairs my freedom to believe whatever I want. I mean, people believe that the earth is flat despite the overwhelming evidence that to the contrary. Um though it's sort of intuitive in some sort of folk level that the earth is the earth is flat, but we have these days overwhelming evidence that it's not. But people, if you want to phrase it this way, still choose to believe that it's it's flat. So, it doesn't seem like overwhelming evidence is in any way impairing their freedom here. I'm just I just don't see the force of that argument at all that free free choice or free will has anything at all to do with um uh with these miracles

because a informed choice requires clear and um uh concise and uh definitive information and two such information, if it's clear and and understandable and relevant, enhances freedom. It doesn't it doesn't diminish it. So, I I think that's important though and and again I camera's frozen again. I want to emphasize that that shouldn't be the scene as that's not the final answer on this. It should be the beginning of this discussion which is probably more important in a lot of these cases than then talking about all of the details of the naturalistic explanations. Anyway.

Uh ba ba ba ba, just looking through chat here.

Yeah, thanks Dale. Appreciate it. Uh, >> [laughter] >> Sorry, Nathan. Um, Mm, [clears throat] jeez, lots of comments here. Sorry, a little behind. Yeah, I mean, this is another example, right? When we're trying to convince a jury of something, we want to be sure that they have all relevant information. And now, sometimes we do prevent the jury from having certain information.

Usually, that's when some rule has been violated in obtaining the information, if it's illegally obtained, for example, or the judge rules that it's not relevant to the case and things like that. So, there's very specific procedural reasons. But, we don't normally think that if information is relevant and legally obtained, um, that it should be withheld from the jury to sort of promote their freedom of choice to to choose, um, the verdict.

That that just doesn't make any sense. I I think that's another good example. Oh, this is getting personal. Would you say Ethan uses the strongest debater you've ever encountered? Ethan is very knowledgeable about, um, the relevant miracle, and he's very confident, and I think people mistake those two things for being a good debater. Now, I suppose, you know, you could define it just in terms of how many people find it compelling. Um, I I've not seen a lot of uh, actually, I I I couldn't find any structured debates that Ethan's actually been in, and ours certainly wasn't. It was an unstructured um, And so, um, I don't know how many he's been in. I I had a look, and most of what I saw were interviews. Uh, I I wasn't very impressed with how Ethan

conducted the discussion in terms of the techniques that he used. I think that he very regularly, um, presented far too much information and made many unsubstantiated claims that made it impossible to narrow the discussion or work through things logically, and um, I think that's a that can be a persuasive debating strategy, but I don't think it's intellectually honest. Um, I also think he was often not very good at explaining what he thought or why he thought in a way that the audience could follow, and I think clarity is very important as well. Um, I think William Lane Craig is a very good debater, even though he sometimes uses dubious strategies, but I think he's very structured and clear and logical. And I wouldn't have said the

same I don't say the same thing about Ethan. Now, I've not seen him in a formal debate, so maybe he is good, but so the so the so the the short answer to the question is no, I would not. Um, and what we had wasn't a debate, it was a discussion. I actually think it should have been a structured debate. I think that would have made things a lot easier to follow. Um, uh, but anyway, that's that's the format that we had.

Um, da da da da Uh, No worries, thanks to I mean, it's a it's a good question and I'd like I I think it's it's something that we should discuss more. Um, again, not trying to present the final answer here, but it's um, it's obviously that uh, an important issue with trying to assess the possibility of different explanations. So, it's it's sort of part of the point that I'm trying to make here is that we we're focusing on the wrong things or disproportionately in the wrong things in these discussions. It's not reasonable to ask the skeptic to answer everything and to have a very worked out detailed account and then to say very little about um, why God would do these certain things and what the reasons are for thinking

that he would act in a certain way. Um, and actually some of this also comes to um, the tendency of Christians or theists or apologists to characterize the debate as between atheists or skeptics and then well, themselves or other believers, which is very disingenuous unless the question is literally the existence of God. Um, because uh, Nathan and I did a video on this years ago on Better Apologetics. When you listen to Islamic counter apologetics of Christians or Christian counter apologetics of Islam or Jewish counter apologetics of Christianity or different branches of like Protestants against Catholics and so forth. They're saying exactly the same things or almost exactly the same things most of the time as as a skeptic or atheist are. So so

religious people often have the exact same criticisms of their of competing doctrinal or religious beliefs as as skeptics do of those. Not always like sometimes um sometimes there'll be some differences or nuances, but like a large percentage of the time it's very similar. So it's not just that the believer thinks a miracle happened and the skeptic atheist doesn't. It's that no one else believes that that happened or at least not in the way that they think that it did.

Even if that they think perhaps a miracle occurred or there was some supernatural event, they don't attach the same theological significance to it, which is the whole point that I'm making. So this is the issue about like would God resurrect Jesus for example? This is the point that I make. Jews historically and to this day the vast majority of Jews categorically and emphatically deny that God would have any reason or any business in resurrecting Jesus in this way. They don't think that Jesus fit the criteria for the Messiah. They don't think that God would have any business resurrecting the Messiah at like this time in the middle of history.

And they don't think that the Messiah was going to die for our sins nor that the Messiah was actually like the son of God or part of the Trinity. That they reject all of the theological aspects to motivating the action in the first place. And they're not atheists, needless to say they're Jews, right? So I think this is highly relevant for assessing the claim that these are expected theological positions that motivate and like would give plausible like prior plausibility to to the resurrection. I think the resurrection has no prior plausibility in that that Jewish context. Or maybe I shouldn't say no as a Bayesian, I'd say extremely low prior plausibility in that context. And that has nothing to do with being an

atheist. That's purely on the basis of the plausibility of that theological claim in the context in which it originated. Of course the Christian can dispute those interpretations and argue against that, but then it's always going to come down to an issue of how they establish antecedent to looking at the evidence itself because this is about prior plausibility, how they establish those theological claims.

Um Uh and and I just see very little attempt to do that. And and I think that this is a huge problem, because it they're just never going to be able to establish, if they don't if they don't really um take that issue seriously and try to resolve it, they're never going to be able to establish that um the miracle explanation can um can compete with any kind of naturalistic hypothesis if they can't even get the basic plausibility of divine action off the ground there.

But I mean yeah, I've made this point many times before, but it's it's it's something that I feel like I it took me a while to really understand this. And it it's still not really appreciated by most people who engage in these sorts of debates. Um that we really have to um really have to think carefully about the logic of the divine intervention and use similar approaches uh to critique that as we do when assessing naturalistic explanations.

Uh to to to What's this one here? For sure you just step into the ring with me as you have months of research on a on the topic in the debate. You absolutely clubbed me and you were forced to move on multiple times. Well, you're entitled to your opinion there. I don't really see how he clubbed me. Uh we could perhaps I I as I said, I don't want to do a deep response to that. I think that I'll I'll do a video response in the future uh when he's had a chance to like publish some of the things that he was talking about. But just in terms of forced to move on. So, I think the main time that that I asked to move on was when we were discussing Ethan's claim that it's not possible for a translucidus cloud to uh attenuate the light of the sun

sufficiently for to be uh possible to look at it without without it hurting, whilst at the same time retaining the orb of the sun as visible. Now, as far as I can tell, Ethan offered absolutely no evidence for this claim other than he made a vague reference to his simulations. The only thing that he said was that the amount of attenuation of of um What's the word? Uh eclipse glass Sorry, eclipse glasses was uh was 10 to the 6th or 10 to the 5th, I think it was. And um that when it's attenuated to that extent, then you're not going to be able to see um you're not going to be able to see a disc. I'm not really sure.

But yeah, as I even said, I I don't know what the justification for that second part of it was. He kept repeating this claim over and over again. And so moving on from the meteorological aspects where I just feel like we were making no progress, I turned to trying to assess cuz he agreed with me that it is possible for the sun to be attenuated by the clouds, but not in the specific conditions, right? Is what he highlighted. Like he talked about the altitude of the sun, and he talked about the reports that people were made about like being able to see it without hurting their eyes. And Oh yeah, the the other thing is that people reported there being no clouds was the other thing. And so we Remember we talked about the idea of the window

that people reported in the sky. And I asked him whether there was evidence of people specifically saying that there was blue sky behind the clouds. He said there was, but couldn't come up with anything. So I don't know if there are accounts. I haven't seen any to that effect. I argued that it was a reasonable interpretation of what people were saying that there was a break in the clouds uh the the rain clouds that that were initially obscuring the sun, and that that revealed the sun behind the translucent clouds that people didn't notice was there because they they saw the sun and were captivated with that, and they didn't realize that it was still being shrouded by the translucent clouds. We then got into a debate about

interpreting one of the specific eyewitnesses and the exact words that they chose. I should say the English translation of the words that they chose cuz I'm pretty sure that they didn't speak English, which is you know, a further issue there. Um, and we went round in circles I think for quite a while about how to interpret this and I asked him how does he know that the way he's interpreting it is the correct way because I highlighted a number of points that I thought didn't really make sense about what they said and that it was sort of ambiguous. And at that point I realized that we were just making no progress here and he was just emphatically insisting on his interpretation where I was just not sure why we should accept

that. Um, especially relative to all the other factors like people reporting different things. And so I suggested that we move on to a different topic. Now, if you interpret that as me being clubbed, that's uh, entirely up to your interpretation, but that's my impression of what happened. Um, I decided that it was worth talking about other things and I wanted to make sure uh, you know, although I devote a lot of time to these sorts of things, I don't have unlimited time. We had two hours to do this discussion. We'd already used most of it talking about just the clouds issue and I wanted to make sure we had time to talk about that paper that he cited as well. So I suggested we move on to that.

Um, and then he went to do a similar thing which is that he uh, then didn't just discuss the paper. He started discussing all these extra simulations and additional lines that he'd drawn on it which I hadn't seen before and so can't comment specifically on. I don't know why anyone would find that convincing when he's doing additional analysis that hadn't been published or documented anywhere else. Well, like, you know, I'll when he makes them available presumably on his blog, I'll have a look at them and we can discuss them, but I highlighted the way I had analyzed that and I don't think that the length or distinctness of the shadows is anywhere near sufficient to establish that the sun was at a lower latitude at

a lower elevation than um, than than was expected. But anyway, so the point is that I moved on to that because of time constraints and because I thought we were getting nowhere. So that's my impression of it. I do think it would have been better to have a more structured discussion um, because I and I highlighted this at the time, Ethan many times uh, just made so many claims at once and made it very difficult to maintain a logical flow of the discussion that I tried to do, but it was very difficult. Um, so anyway, I think that a more structured discussion um, would be helpful in the future, but anyway, thank you for your thoughts.

Let's continue.

Yeah, no worries. I think that part of the reason why people don't talk about this very much. I think it it needs to get more attention cuz it's kind of important.

I mean to to be honest with you I I think that Cameron should have have done that himself and maybe he was about to to be fair. I mean I I just thought that this was going nowhere and I wanted to discuss other things. So yeah, I think a bit more moderation would have helped to uh to get some progress there. I'm getting there and speaking of time I'll need to head off soon, but just trying to go through chat here.

photo photo >> [laughter] >> I'm not quite sure what that means, but um Actually this was a point that to be honest I hadn't even uh thought of I mean I I thought about this, but I hadn't really um developed a coherent like an articulated response to this, but I was actually wondering about this because actually yeah, thanks for letting me giving me an opportunity to geek out about this.

So Ethan and I had a brief dispute right near the end of the discussion about the paper where I said where I had in my head calculation that I just did for illustration purposes. I'm not saying that my reading of the shadows is like right. I was just illustrating how you can shift things around a bit and get very different answers. I need to put that on my blog as well. I said I'd do that. But anyway, I I got a an elevation of 39.7 degrees I think. And Ethan said that's that's still not right because it was 42 degrees. And I and I said, well, according to what I looked up it should have been about 39 40 at the time.

I think I said 39 And um, he said no, it's 42. He said "When you go to the software and then that's what you get." And I said, "Well, I I went to the website, I think it was like I forgot what the URL is, but it's specifically for this, and I put in the exact time and and uh and location, and it was they they gave 37, not 42." But then I realized that there's this whole extra issue, right? Because I was I was putting in a time of noon, but you see, Portugal uh this was in 1917 in Portugal. Portugal, I think it was just the year before 1916 just adopted daylight saving time.

And I I think I was reading about this, actually changed exactly when it was implemented in 1916 compared to 1917, like what month it went on or off or something. And I think it was actually not that different, it was like 1 month uh before or after. I I I I don't have to get the specifics, but the point is um you actually And then I looked at some of the eyewitness testimonies, and some of them say it was around noon, and some of them say it was around just after 1, like 1:00 p.m. And and some of them actually mention different times, like they they mention like solar time and war time, which presumably is like daylight saving time. So anyway, so I'm actually not sure about what time the alleged miracle is even supposed to have

taken place, because people seem to be using different times. And and that that changes whether you think the elevation of the sun is 42 or 39. That doesn't make a huge difference, but it makes a little bit of a difference. And so but that then got me into thinking, do we know the time that these photographs were actually taken? Because I'd presumed that they were taken around noon, which is when I thought that the uh you know, the the the sight the sighting was supposed to have happened.

But I I couldn't actually find any information about when they were taken. They were obviously taken around that that time, like the crowd was there and they were looking, but it it could have actually been after the fact of the miracle um or even before, potentially. Although after seems more likely, cuz a lot of people are looking at the sun. Anyway, I mean, this is getting into the weeds, and I hope some of that gets some clarity about this. But this was one of my frustrations, because Ethan, I tried to present as clearly as I could the evidence that I had for different claims. A little bit not so much at the end because we did we ran out of time.

But But Ethan would just make all sorts of claims that he didn't even try to substantiate. A number of times I asked him, "Can we look at the wording of the quotes you're appealing to so that we can talk about it and check the specifics?" Um but but he made claims about like when the things happened and people's feeling clothes dried and all these sorts of things that he just didn't try to substantiate. Um and this is very difficult as a as a skeptic um because we need to then you know, the way we assess hypotheses is to look through the details and carefully evaluate them. Um when someone throws out so much at once and doesn't show you the the details or the evidence, it's very difficult to really assess that properly. And so I you have to pick

on one aspect and then work through that and then you know, see where you go. And I tried to do that. I'm not saying I did the best job of that, but it's a very difficult format uh to do that. And so this issue about exactly what time the photo was taken, I think is actually quite critical. And it needs to be established uh what the range is for the times when when this actually happened. If anyone knows some good sources of that, I'd be actually quite interested uh cuz this has this has implications on on what the actual elevation was. Anyway, I just that's something interesting that I was thinking about afterwards and realized that that's not actually something we pinned down.

Um da da da da

Don't get me wrong Matthew Hill, that's that's a whole other issue. Uh all right. Uh there's a bunch of other chat notes in chat, but most of them don't seem to have anything to do with anything. Um So, I'll think I'll end it there. Thanks everyone for coming along and watching. Hopefully, you found this interesting. I know it's a bit different to what I normally do, which is respond to a videos. Uh I've found it increasingly difficult to find like interesting apologetic content to respond to. Like I used to do a lot of responses to Cameron's channel, but let's say it went in a quite a different direction and there's only so many demon videos I can stomach. Um and then uh I've more recently been responding to Shawn um

uh Shawn McDowell. Um but uh even his content I think it's gone downhill. Like it's better than some, but I don't know. There there's a lot of near-death experience stuff on there recently and like kind of culture war-related things. So, I might do some more on his, but I just find it hard to motivate myself to respond to like the same video again with like the same soggy arguments about uh things that I've already addressed. But anyway, if So, the point is if there's interesting videos and like the the whole thing about Fatima was an example of this that people recommended me to respond to. So, that's why I took that on. Um Uh please send them to me things that you think would be interesting um and like substantive. And um or, you know,

sufficiently egregious that I should respond to it anyway. Uh someone has brought to my attention that there was I think a fairly recent discussion between uh uh William Lane Craig um uh and um oh, I'm forgetting other people's names. That physicist lady uh and um and uh I should have remembered who I was talking about. Uh let me get the names up cuz they they sounded quite interesting uh that I want to No, that's what That's not what I wanted. Where did this message Someone will uh know what I'm talking about probably before I pull up the names. Yeah, here we go. Um Sabine Hossenfelder Hossenfelder was who I was thinking of and uh Zizek and uh William Lane Craig and then Rowan Williams about the existence of God. Um oh, that

was probably unbelievable. Okay, I didn't didn't notice that. So, that sounds like it would be quite an interesting one to review. Very interesting hodgepodge of people there. Uh so, I probably will do I'll have a look and see if a review of that will be interesting. Um My I mean just on the face of it I would expect William Lane Craig to um come across fairly well in that because he's quite generally clear and organized in what he says and I suspect he knows um considerably more about theology and apologetics than uh Sabine and uh Zizek do, but uh maybe they'll surprise me. Anyway, but so that's one I've got on my radar, but if there's anything else uh please let me know. Uh hopefully you found this interesting. If

so, leave a comment and a like and and all that good stuff. Don't forget to check out my uh podcast, Science of Everything podcast, if you're interested in learning more about science. That's another thing that I do. Um thanks again. Take care, everyone. I'll see you next time. Bye.
